---
type: NoteCard
tags: []
---

# Lab - Getting Started With NodeJS

One of the advantages of using NodeJS is working with NPM (Node Package Manager).

## Installing NodeJS

Here are the steps to set up a dev environment for NodeJS and VS Code.

*   Install Node.js: Go to the Node.js website ([https://nodejs.org/](https://nodejs.org/fr/)) and download your operating system's latest version of Node.js. Follow the installation instructions.
*   Install VS Code: Go to the VS Code website (<https://code.visualstudio.com/>) and download your operating system's latest version of VS Code. Follow the installation instructions.

## Node REPL

NodeJS has a REPL mode (read-eval-print loop). It is useful for quick testing of code. REPL is an interactive application that runs in the terminal.

REPL will:

*   **Read**: Reads and parses the user's JavaScript code input (or shows an error if the code is invalid).
*   **Eval**: Evaluates the entered JavaScript code.
*   **Print**: Prints the computed results.
*   **Loop**: Loops and waits for the user to enter a new command (or exits if the user enters **ctrl-c** twice).

To enter the REPL mode, type the following in a terminal:

```js
node

// output
Welcome to Node.js v21.0.0.
Type ".help" for more information
```

Once inside REPL mode you can write JS code and see the results. For example:

```js
console.log('Hello World, from the REPL.')
```

```js
3 + 4
```

```js
i = 0;
while(i < 5) { console.log('Loop ', i); i++; }
```

To exit the REPL mode press \`Ctrl+C\`

```js
// output
To exit, press Ctrl+C again or Ctrl+D or type .exit
```

## Creating an NPM Project

It is very easy to create a NodeJS project using NPM. Here are the steps:

*   Create a folder, for example, `node-lab1`
*   Open a terminal inside the folder `node-lab1`
*   Type the command `npm init` and follow the steps

The npm init command inilialize a nodejs project. When runing it you will be asked to complete a few steps about the project. The command creates an important file called `package.json` inside the project folder.

## Package.json

Here is an example of package.json, it is a JSON file.

```json
{
  "name": "node-lab1",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "description": "",
  "main": "script.js",
  "dependencies": {},
  "devDependencies": {},
  "scripts": {
    "test": "echo \"Error: no test specified\" && exit 1"
  },
  "keywords": [],
  "author": "",
  "license": "ISC"
}
```

Three important parts in the package.json: ***dependencies, devDependencies, and scripts.***

Package.json stores other meta-data for a project, such as project name, version, etc.

## Dependencies and ***DevDependencies***

Dependencies are the libraries that the nodejs project uses at runtime. Dependencies will be bundled and packaged with the project in production mode.

DevDependencies are libraries used only for development. They are not added to the bundle in production mode. For example, librairies that we use to build or safe check a project (safety-net) are installed as devDependencies.

All the dependencies are installed inside a the folder **node\_moduels**. The folder node\_module is created automatically when we install the first dependency and it is located inside the project folder.

## Scripts

Scripts are the terminal commands that execute JS tasks in the project. We often have tasks like start, build, test, and lint in a project.

Here is the format of the NPM scripts:

```json
"scripts" : {
  "<action-name>" : "<script-command>"
}
```

```json
scripts" : {
  "start" : "node ./src/index.js",
  "test": "jest",
  "build": "tsc",
  "lint": "eslint"
}
```

To run a script we the following format:

```json
npm run <action-name> 
```

For example:

```js
npm run start
```

## Lock.file

Package managers have a file called ***lock*** file. For npm is called ***package.lock,*** for yarn is called yarn.lock. The lock file is always generated by the manager and should never be changed manually. It contains the fixed versions of the dependencies that the project depends on.

A project may depend on different dependencies with different versions. Dependencies of a project also have their own dependencies. In addition, dependencies depend on each other. Package managers will parse all the dependencies in a project including their sub-dependencies and resolve the dependency tree for a project. The resolved dependency tree is written in the lock file.
